Update boot images for GCP (tech preview) (#76910)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/mco-update-boot-images.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * post_installation_configuration/machine-configuration-tasks.adoc
// * nodes/nodes-nodes-managing.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="mco-update-boot-images_{context}"]
= Updating boot images

A boot image is the image used by the Machine Config Operator (MCO) to boot up a {op-system-first} node. By default, the boot image is not managed by {product-title}. 

This means that the boot image in your cluster is not updated along with your cluster. For example, if your cluster was originally created with {product-title} 4.11, the boot image used by the cluster is the same 4.11 version. When you scale up a new node, the MCO boots up that node with the originally-installed boot image and then automatically upgrades the node to the current cluster version. While this is a seamless process to the user, this process can cause issues such as the following conditions: 

* Extra time to start up nodes
* Certificate expiration issues
* Version skew issues

> To avoid these issues, you can configure your cluster so that it updates the boot image anytime that you update your cluster. You can enable this feature by modifying the `MachineConfiguration` object. Currently, the ability to update the boot image is available for only Google Cloud Platform (GCP) clusters and is not supported for clusters managed by the Cluster CAPI Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid these issues, you can configure your cluster so that it updates the boot image anytime that you update your cluster. You can enable this feature by modifying the `MachineConfiguration` object named `cluster`. Currently, the ability to update the boot image is available for only Google Cloud Platform (GCP) clusters and is not supported for clusters managed by the Cluster CAPI Operator.
```

:FeatureName: Boot image updating
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

> You can view the current boot image used in your cluster by examining a machine set:

Reviewer: Maybe worth mentioning that the way the boot image represented in the machineset is dependent on the platform, as the structure of the providerSpec field varies between platforms(GCP providerSpecs look different from AWS providerSpecs)

Author: Done

.Example machine set with the boot image reference

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machine.openshift.io/v1beta1
kind: MachineSet
metadata:
  name: ci-ln-hmy310k-72292-5f87z-worker-a
  namespace: openshift-machine-api
spec:
# ...
  template:
# ...
    spec:
# ...
      providerSpec:
# ...
        value:
          disks:
          - autoDelete: true
            boot: true
            projects/rhcos-cloud/global/images/rhcos-411-85-202203181601-0-gcp-x86-64 <1>
# ...
----
<1> This boot image is the same as the installed {product-title} version, in this example, {product-title} 4.11. 

If you configure your cluster to update your boot images, the boot image referenced in your machine sets is the same version as the cluster.

> If want to you opt out of this feature after some nodes have been updated with the new boot image, the nodes retain the updated boot image. There is no way to roll back the nodes to the original boot image version. Any new nodes created after opting out are created with the original boot image. Note that the boot image referenced in the machine set is not reverted, and continues to show the current cluster version.

Reviewer: This is worded a little confusing. Here is an example that is hopefully helpful:

- MachineSet originally had boot image A. Any nodes scaled from this machineset will boot on image A.
- User upgrades the cluster version(not boot image) to image B.
- Any nodes scaled now will still be image A, as boot image updates are off and the machineset still references A.
- User now turns on boot image updates and opts in the MachineSet to boot image updates.
- MachineSet is now updated to boot image B. Any nodes scaled from this machineset in the future will have boot image B. As a result, the cluster will have a mixture of nodes, some born on A, some born on B.
- User now turns off boot image updates. The MachineSet will continue to reference bootimage B. Any nodes scaled up will still start from bootimage B, as the machineset refers to it.
- User upgrades the cluster to C. As the boot image update feature is off, the bootimage is still B, and any nodes launched from this machineset will still be born on B.

I hope that helps clarify things - the nodes will always start off based what is storied in the machineset. If the feature is turned off after some updates, any newly scaled nodes will start from the last update(B in this example) and not the latest. Turning off the feature will only prevent the machineset from being updated again - it does not mean that the machineset is restored back to the original image(A in the example).

.Prerequisites

* You have enabled the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set by using the feature gates. For more information, see _Enabling features using feature gates_.

.Procedure

. Enable updating boot images by editing the `MachineConfiguration` object:
+
[source,terminal] 
----

> $ oc edit MachineConfiguration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc edit MachineConfiguration/cluster
```

----

.. Optional: Configure the boot image update for all machine sets:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfiguration
metadata:
  name: cluster
  namespace: openshift-machine-config-operator
spec:
# ...
  managedBootImages: <1>
    machineManagers: 
    - resource: machinesets
      apiGroup: machine.openshift.io
      selection:
        mode: All <2>
----
<1> Opts into boot image updating.
<2> Specifies that all machine sets in the cluster will be updated.

.. Optional: Configure the boot image updating for specific machine sets
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfiguration
metadata:
  name: cluster
  namespace: openshift-machine-config-operator
spec:
# ...
  managedBootImages: <1>
    machineManagers:
    - resource: machinesets
      apiGroup: machine.openshift.io
      selection:
        mode: Partial
          partial:
            machineResourceSelector:
              matchLabels:

>                 update-boot-image: "true" <2>

Reviewer: looks like the preview takes out the quotes around true, oof

Author: It looks OK now.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * post_installation_configuration/machine-configuration-tasks.adoc
// * nodes/nodes-nodes-managing.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="mco-update-boot-images_{context}"]
= Updating boot images

> A boot image is the image used by the Machine Config Operator (MCO) to boot up a {op-system-first} node. By default, the boot image is not managed by {product-title}. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Machine Config Operator (MCO) uses a boot image to boot up a {op-system-first} node. By default, {product-title} does not manage the boot image. 
```

> This means that the boot image in your cluster is not updated along with your cluster. For example, if your cluster was originally created with {product-title} 4.11, the boot image used by the cluster to create nodes is the same 4.11 version. When you scale up a new node, the MCO boots up that node with the originally-installed boot image. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that the boot image in your cluster is not updated along with your cluster. For example, if your cluster was originally created with {product-title} 4.11, the boot image that the cluster uses to create nodes is the same 4.11. If you scale up a new node, the MCO boots up that node with the originally installed boot image.
```

> For example, if the cluster was installed using {product-title} 4.11, any nodes that get scaled up use the 4.11 image. If the cluster is later upgraded to 4.12, by default any nodes scaled up still boot on the 4.11 image. After upgrading the cluster to {product-title} 4.13 and higher, new nodes continue to be scaled with the same 4.11 image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if the cluster was installed by using {product-title} 4.11, all nodes that are scaled up use the 4.11 image. If the cluster is later upgraded to 4.12, all upscaled nodes continue to boot with the 4.11 image by default. After upgrading the cluster to {product-title} 4.13 and higher, new nodes continue to be scaled with the same 4.11 image.
```

> This process can cause issues such as the following conditions: 
> 
> * Extra time to start up nodes
> * Certificate expiration issues
> * Version skew issues

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This process could cause the following issues: 

* Extra time to start up nodes
* Certificate expiration issues
* Version skew issues
```

> To avoid these issues, you can configure your cluster so that it updates the boot image anytime that you update your cluster. You can enable this feature by modifying the `MachineConfiguration` object, named `cluster`. Currently, the ability to update the boot image is available for only Google Cloud Platform (GCP) clusters and is not supported for clusters managed by the Cluster CAPI Operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid these issues, you can configure your cluster to update the boot image whenever you update your cluster. By modifying the `MachineConfiguration` object named `cluster`, you can enable this feature. Currently, the ability to update the boot image is only available for Google Cloud Platform (GCP) clusters and is not supported for clusters managed by the Cluster CAPI Operator.
```

:FeatureName: The updating boot image feature
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[]

> You can view the current boot image used in your cluster by examining a machine set:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To view the current boot image used in your cluster, examine a machine set:
```

.Example machine set with the boot image reference

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: machine.openshift.io/v1beta1
kind: MachineSet
metadata:
  name: ci-ln-hmy310k-72292-5f87z-worker-a
  namespace: openshift-machine-api
spec:
# ...
  template:
# ...
    spec:
# ...
      providerSpec:
# ...
        value:
          disks:
          - autoDelete: true
            boot: true
            image: projects/rhcos-cloud/global/images/rhcos-411-85-202203181601-0-gcp-x86-64 <1>
# ...
----

> <1> This boot image is the same as the installed {product-title} version, in this example, {product-title} 4.11. Note that way that the boot image is represented in the machine set depends on the platform, as the structure of the `providerSpec` field varies between platforms.
> 
> If you configure your cluster to update your boot images, the boot image referenced in your machine sets will be the same version as the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> This boot image is the same as the installed {product-title} version, in this example {product-title} 4.11 The way in which the boot image is represented in the machine record depends on the platform, as the structure of the `providerSpec` field differs from platform to platform.

If you configure your cluster to update your boot images, the boot image referenced in your machine sets matches the version of the cluster.
```

.Prerequisites

> * You have enabled the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set by using the feature gates. For more information, see _Enabling features using feature gates_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You have enabled the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set by using the feature gates. For more information, see "Enabling features using feature gates" in the "Additional resources"  section.
```

.Procedure

> . Enable updating boot images by editing the `MachineConfiguration` object:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Edit the `MachineConfiguration` object to enable the updating of boot images by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal] 
----
$ oc edit MachineConfiguration cluster
----

> .. Optional: Configure the boot image update for all machine sets:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Optional: Configure the boot image update for all the machine sets:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfiguration
metadata:
  name: cluster
  namespace: openshift-machine-config-operator
spec:
# ...
  managedBootImages: <1>
    machineManagers: 
    - resource: machinesets
      apiGroup: machine.openshift.io
      selection:
        mode: All <2>
----

> <1> Opts into boot image updating.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Activates the boot image update.
```

> <2> Specifies that all machine sets in the cluster will be updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> Specifies that all the machine sets in the cluster should be updated.
```

> .. Optional: Configure the boot image updating for specific machine sets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Optional: Configure the boot image update for specific machine sets:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfiguration
metadata:
  name: cluster
  namespace: openshift-machine-config-operator
spec:
# ...
  managedBootImages: <1>
    machineManagers:
    - resource: machinesets
      apiGroup: machine.openshift.io
      selection:
        mode: Partial
          partial:
            machineResourceSelector:
              matchLabels:
                update-boot-image: "true" <2>
----

> <1> Opts into the the boot image updating.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Activates the boot image update.
```

> <2> Specifies that any machine set with this label will use updated boot images. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> Specifies that any machine set with this label should use updated boot images. 
```

+
[TIP]
====

> If an appropriate label is not present on the machine set, add a key/value pair such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an appropriate label is not present on the machine set, add a key/value pair by running the following command:
```

----
$ oc label machineset ci-ln-hmy310k-72292-5f87z-worker-a update-boot-image=true -n openshift-machine-api
----
====

.Verification

> . Get the boot image version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Get the boot image version by running the following command:
```
